Last Updated on September 4, 2024
Generative programming is arguably the most innovative concept in the generative artificial intelligence (AI) sector. This cutting-edge technology was introduced to help software developers produce content automatically with the goal of improving programmer productivity. It’s the programming equivalent of AI text, image, and video creation.
With generative programming, a single developer can churn out tons of software from simple prompts. But as you might expect, that intricate process takes place with the aid of special tools and applications.
This article looks at the 10 most reliable generative programming platforms that are transforming the coding industry.
How Do Generative Programming Tools Work?
Generative programming software study patterns in existing code. They then use the information to generate new lines of code which are optimized for accuracy, readability, and efficiency.
But generative programming applications don’t stop there. These tools also help review existing codes and identify potential coding issues. Developers can leverage such information to further enhance accuracy and forestall programming downtimes.
Although generative programming is still a relatively new concept, smart developers are already leveraging this advanced technology to optimize their productivity. And the good news is that there are plenty of reliable apps and tools to get you started.
10 Generative Programming AI Tools and Apps
1. ChatGPT
Pricing: Plans start from $20/month
ChatGPT by OpenAI is an advanced Natural Language Processing (NLP) model that’s probably best known for its chatbot services. However, this tool can also help software developers improve their productivity through its powerful generative programming abilities.
ChatGPT deploys various strategies to take the hassles from coding.
For instance, the software provides basic text prompts which leverage context, programming knowledge, and a host of code templates to predict a coding sequence. You can use the app to complete existing codes as well as generate new ones from scratch.
ChatGPT is also able to point out potential errors and explain how these inaccuracies could mar your programming project. Developers can then use the information to determine whether the code needs refactoring, review, or simplification.
There are tons of other coding problems you can resolve using ChatGPT. The service even offers insightful advice on software development.
ChatGPT may also help software developers to write unit tests. It fulfills that important task by analyzing existing codes, mastering the codes’ behavior and functionality, and then recommending test cases. Whether you’re a budding or seasoned developer looking for a non-human mentor, you definitely want to check out ChatGPT.
However, remember that ChatGPT is still inadequate when it comes to giving your code deeper insights. Besides, the tool can produce various outcomes when you rephrase the prompt.
2. CodeX
Pricing: Token-based
CodeX is a product by the same company that gave us ChatGPT – OpenAI. However, coders will find this tool more effective than ChatGPT. That’s because it was released exclusively for generative programming as opposed to ChatGPT which is best known for its online chatting and text creation services.
CodeX has a memory of 14 KB for Python code whereas ChatGPT has a memory of 4 KB. That means CodeX is up to three times more efficient at contextualizing coding prompts than its cousin – ChatGPT.
According to the developer, CodeX can write code in over twelve languages. These include Python, JavaScript, PHP, Perl, Ruby, Swift, Go, TypeScript, Shell, and BASH.
The tool has been trained on billions of lines of source code available in public repositories, such as those on GitHub. That says a lot about its speed and accuracy. Feed any prompt into the app’s dashboard then sit back and let it complete the code in a matter of minutes.
CodeX is primarily available to software developers and platform companies through a private beta. However, the tool is still accessible to smaller teams on a token basis.
It’s also worth noting that CodeX is a general-purpose generative programming model. That means you can deploy the app to any programming task, such as refactoring, explaining, and transpilation.
3. PolyCoder
Pricing: Free
PolyCoder is an open-source generative programming model based on OpenAI’s GPT-2. The program was released by researchers from Carnegie Mellon University.
PolyCoder is widely considered an open-source alternative to CodeX. The two platforms share many similarities and differ primarily in their accessibility to the public.
Thanks to PolyCoder’s open-source model, any developer can contribute to the platform to enhance its efficiency. Coders also get to benefit from invaluable insights shared by the app’s previous users.
As you’d expect of any CodeX alternative, PolyCoder is trained in a dozen programming languages. The tool is especially able to generate codes in C in greater accuracy than most other models, including CodeX. Other programming languages supported by the app include C#, C++, PHP, Python, Go, Java, JavaScript, Ruby, Rust, Scala, and TypeScript.
According to its developers, PolyCoder has demonstrated a remarkable ability to complete existing codes as well as synthesize new ones. The app is fairly efficient at other aspects of generative programming, including pointing out errors.
If you’re a startup or budding developer looking for an affordable AI coding assistant, you probably want to look in the direction of PolyCoder.
4. Replit Ghostwriter
Pricing: Paid plans start from $7/month; a free version also available
Replit Ghostwriter is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) designed to help software developers write, test, and deploy code. The platform’s cloud hosting translates to ease of accessibility. It also means the service can seamlessly integrate with other cloud-based software to boost a programmer’s productivity.
Replit Ghostwriter lets programmers generate codes in multiple languages, including Python, C++, and Ruby. The application comes with many templates and starter projects aimed at helping new coders fully grasp the concept of generative programming.
Replit comes with four different elements, namely:
• Complete Code, which analyzes existing codes and offers insightful suggestions for continuations
• Generate Code, which generates new codes based on your suggestions
• Transform Code, which helps you to refactor or modernize your code to meet industry standards
• Explain Code, which analyzes the functionality of existing codes using natural language
In addition to the four major components, Replit provides many other features that collectively help it with code completion, generation, and transformation. You can also take advantage of the tool’s in-editor search capabilities to customize the results further to your liking.
5. Codacy
Pricing: Paid plans start from $15/month; free for open-source teams
Flexible pricing is one of the things that set Codacy apart from many generative AI-based programming tools. The app has several premium packages in addition to a free plan that’s available to open-source teams.
All packages support static code analysis for over 40 different languages as well as code coverage tracking. The tracking feature is particularly important for programmers who wish to analyze the extent to which their code has been executed.
There’s also application program interface (API) access that offers coders extended automation and customization. This feature enhances the app’s ability to access and leverage crucial information from other tools in predicting unique code sequences. The software integrates seamlessly with dozens of platforms, including GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket, Slack, and Jira, to mention but a few.
Besides helping to generate new lines of code, Codacy also evaluates codes for errors and inaccuracies. It then offers immediate feedback to help developers make critical decisions pertaining to their programming project.
Codacy also provides support for linter configuration files. Other noteworthy features include analysis for cloud infrastructure-as-code (IAC) frameworks and unhindered access to a massive community of developers.
6. TabNine
Pricing: Paid plans start from $12/month; a free version also available
The first thing you’ll notice about TabNine is that it operates primarily as a code completion tool. The software leverages high-end generative AI technology to study the context and syntax of your code prompts. It then predicts and suggests the next lines of the codes.
TabNine is so efficient that it can complete an entire line of code and still deliver accurate and contextual results. The tool automatically indexes your codes as you render them in real time and then generates personalized suggestions from your writing patterns.
Many developers have rated TabNine’s productivity up to three times that of human programmers. However, it’s important to note that TabNine isn’t an end-to-end code generator. Which means that it must still rely on your inputs to predict the next line of code.
TabNine supports over twenty programming languages, including Python, JavaScript, TypeScript, C++, Go, Rust, and Bash. It also integrates with more than fifteen third-party applications, including popular code editing tools like Sublime, IntelliJ, and VS Code.
Although TabNine exists primarily as a code completion tool, it also performs moderately well when it comes to text auto-generation and syntax highlighting. The software also provides a cloud-based version that lets developers access their coding tools remotely from any device.
7. CoPilot by GitHub
Pricing: Plans start from $19/month
CoPilot is not a proprietary product of GitHub but a joint venture between GitHub and OpenAI – two of the leading artificial intelligence companies.
Like TabNine, CoPilot works mainly as a code completion tool. The application analyzes a programmer’s writing pattern and then proposes accurate code snippets. It’s one of the most reliable programs as far as transforming natural language prompts into technical coding suggestions.
Since it’s a collaborative effort of renowned AI brands, it’s unsurprising that CoPilot has piqued the interest of many established software developing companies. The tool works across all major programming languages, from Python to JavaScript, TypeScript, and C++.
As a code completion tool, CoPilot does an excellent job of speeding up coding processes. Developers can use this tool to work faster and more efficiently on a project.
Another noteworthy feature of CoPilot is its ability to serve as an extension for popular code editors, including Visual Studio Code, JetBrains, and Neovim. This feature lends more credence to the software as a cost-saving generative programming AI platform.
8. CodeT5
Pricing: Paid plans start from $3.67/month; a free version also available
CodeT5 is another open-source generative programming AI app on this list. The software is an ingenious product of a team of researchers at SalesForce.
CodeT5’s developers reportedly trained the app using over 8.35 million instances of code. These included valuable comments from other programmers posted on public repositories like GitHub. Most of these datasets came from CodeSearchNet and BigQuery.
Like other tools that utilize the open-source model, CodeT5 is publicly available and seasoned developers can make changes to continuously improve the platform. The software supports generative programming in various languages. Examples include Python, JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, Go, C, and C#.
But perhaps what sets CodeT5 apart is its advanced programming capabilities which are based on Google’s T5 (Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer) framework.
CodeT5 is also one of the most affordable generative programming AI software out there. The app offers several premium packages which start from as low as $3.67 per month. There’s also a free plan that comes with limited features.
9. Mutable
Pricing: Paid plans start from $10/month; a free trial version also available
MutableAI is an AI-powered generative programming software designed to automate repetitive coding tasks with a view to optimizing programmer productivity. The coding assistant deploys natural language input to predict complex coding sequences based on an established writing pattern.
One of MutableAI’s noteworthy features is an open-ended query dialog. Using this feature, coders can pose and get accurate answers to complex programming questions.
The inclusion of domain-specific transformations makes MutableAI incredibly efficient at understanding specific types of code. You only need to input coding prompts to get the tool started and you’ll be amazed at how quickly it will predict the next lines.
MutableAI is also outstanding for its auto-completion and type annotation features. The tool supports real-time pairing and code sharing, making it suitable for programmers working in a team. Other things you’ll love about the generative programming software is its open-ended transformations and the ability to productionize code.
However, MutableAI falls short in terms of stability and reliability. Besides, the platform isn’t one of the easiest to use.
10. CodeWP
Pricing: Paid plans start from $12/month; a free version also available
The last generative programming AI application on this list is especially targeted at WordPress website creators.
Built by Isotropic, this AI WordPress code generator supports PHP and JS. It’s also compatible with modes specific to major page builders and commonly used plugins like WooCommerce. That seamless integration provides the convenience of using this software with other apps from a single platform.
CodeWP is particularly a top recommendation for programmers working in teams. That’s all thanks to features like live collaboration and real-time code feedback.
CodeWP offers both code generation and code explanation features. Not only does the tool help predict new lines of code based on your writing patterns. It also analyzes each line and pinpoints any errors that may affect its final execution.
It’s worth noting that CodeWP works in multiple languages too. Therefore, the tool can be an invaluable asset to teams drawn from different geographical locations. And for your peace of mind, note that this software supports at least ten programming languages.
Wrap Up
Generative programming is still an evolving technology. So, while the above-reviewed tools can help developers optimize their productivity by speeding up the code creation process, they’re still largely inefficient at generating code from scratch.
Therefore, remember to only deploy these tools as a complementary to (not as a replacement for) human programmers.