AI will hit jobs in Indian IT sector but experts say companies can also be ethical about job cuts
Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang recently sounded the alarm about job cuts in the IT sector, saying AI tools like ChatGPT could replace coders in the future. India Today Tech spoke to experts in the Indian IT industry, and they too believe that AI would hit the workforce in IT companies significantly.
With his recent comments about programming and coding, Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang sent ripples through the IT industry, including in India. Huang is of the belief that AI tools like ChatGPT, Gemini and Copilot are going to be so good at writing code that it will make this particular skill of knowing a programming language like C++ and Java redundant. He does not talk about job losses, but his comments do hint at it. India Today Tech spoke to experts in the Indian IT industry, and they too believe that AI would hit the workforce in IT companies significantly.
We are already seeing the impact. Three months into 2024 and thousands have already lost their jobs. Layoffs have been especially bad in the global tech sector. As of February 2024, approximately 32,000 tech employees were laid off this year, according to Layoffs.fyi, a website monitoring tech industry job cuts. This was after some major tech companies like Google, Amazon, Meta, and Cisco announced a large number of job cuts this year.
And while no tech company is willing to say that the job cuts are due to AI tools, if we look behind the word “restructuring” that every tech company has used, it does hint that many jobs are increasingly either not required or can be done by fewer people.
This could be the reason why Huang recently said, “It is our job to create computing technology such that nobody has to program, and that the programming language is human. Everybody in the world is now a programmer. This is the miracle of AI.”
Why the sudden and massive job cuts?
While many companies attribute job cuts to cost-saving and restructuring initiatives, analysts suggest that AI remains a primary driver behind these layoffs. It seems to be happening in two ways. Either AI tools are reducing the need for the number of employees involved in doing something, or — like we see in the case of Apple and Facebook — there is a need to shut down a few projects and reallocate resources to teams that are involved in developing generative AI technologies. At Apple, this has happened with the company’s EV car project, whereas at Facebook there has been a pivot away from Metaverse.
This is something Challenger Gray, a research firm, found in the US. It revealed that the rise of artificial intelligence has brought substantial challenges to professionals across diverse sectors, such as programming, corporate management, legal, accounting, finance, insurance, consulting, and more. As per the report, AI and cost-cutting are the biggest reasons why tech layoffs surged by 136 per cent in 2024.
So, will this get better in the future?
Probably not. We are not saying that. Some of the tech leaders and experts in the Indian IT industry believe so. Earlier this month, an Infosys executive, Satish HC, said that automation would lead to fewer employees being hired in the future in the next three to five years. He suggests that with the increasing adoption of technologies such as generative AI, companies will enhance their efficiency, resulting in a decline in need for people for traditional jobs.
In an exclusive interview, former HCL CEO Vineet Nayar spoke to India Today Tech about the impact of AI on the Indian IT sector. He also believes that AI would lead to IT companies needing 70 per cent fewer employees. "The skills of employees for coding, testing, maintenance, responding to trouble tickets, all that will be taken over by AI...these skills will become obsolete," Nayar predicts.
Another analyst, Neil Shah, who is the VP at Counterpoint Research, also anticipates AI’s impact on certain jobs in the IT sector. “Some bigger tech giants could implement sophisticated AI systems which will automate lots of low-level coding and related tasks such as testing, quality assurance and so forth,” Shah says.
Essentially, as AI tools approach near-human levels of efficiency in future, Indian IT companies possibly face mounting pressure and obstacles. The temptation to downsize their workforce and initiate layoffs may become prominent. For IT companies, the easiest way out is to let go of the experienced (and expensive) staff and replace them with fresh graduates –– who can be paid way less and be easily trained on any new models, and in this case, it would be a generative AI tool like ChatGPT.
But there are some positives too
On the other side of this coin are analysts who are bullish about AI’s impact on IT jobs. Not everybody is predicting layoffs. Analysts like Thomas George at CyberMedia Research believe that AI may make an employee’s daily life easier, but it is still not ready to replace humans.
“It's unlikely that tech companies in India will entirely replace human coders with AI in the near future...Companies can automate coding tasks, but human coders are needed for complex problem-solving, algorithm design, and understanding business requirements,” says George, president of CyberMedia Research.
“In custom software design, especially in India, where human intuition and context-driven algorithms need to be formulated, AI still has a long way to go to replace programmers,” analyst Shah agrees.
Upskilling is the way forward
“Ultimately, every programmer will have to upskill itself to newer AI tools and platforms to ride the AI wave and use it to become a better programmer or become redundant,” Shah suggests.
The way forward from here for IT professionals seems to be to get to know AI better. Analysts and tech leaders alike believe that it is crucial that employees are upskilled in order to deal with the growing automation in the industry.
"You now have a computer that will do what you tell it to do. It is vital that we upskill everyone and the upskilling process will be delightful and surprising," says Nvidia CEO Huang.
In fact, former HCL CEO Vineet Nayar says that if Indian ITs don’t upskill its employees and just let go of them, it won’t just be “unethical” but also disastrous for the IT sector.
Nayar says that choosing to abandon current employees with five, ten, or fifteen years of experience, potentially opting for cheaper alternatives such as fresh graduates to train in AI skills, might appear as a convenient and cost-effective solution. However, he warns that such a strategy would be unethical and could yield “disastrous” effects on India's IT sector in the long run. “Letting go of existing staff and hiring fresh graduates at low cost, would be unethical and disastrous for India,” he says.