/ Our Services /
Artificial intelligence can help you leverage raw data for actionable insights that paves the way to achieve business objectives with well-informed decisions. At Nethues Technologies, we create jaw-dropping AI solutions that seamlessly integrate into your operations and deliver optimum values. Our track record of 2800+ successful projects showcases our passion for providing customer-focused services.
As a renowned AI development company India, we offer a comprehensive suite of AI services that can help you yield tangible results and are capable of performing diverse business tasks. You can also hire AI developers from us for short or long-term engagements.
Overcome business challenges with strategic AI decisions that also accelerates growth. Our consultants can steer you through the complexities of AI implementation for building optimal solutions. We analyze and identify potential use cases and determine how artificial intelligence can help you boost efficiency in products, services, and operations.
Build intelligent chatbots that can help you tackle a large range of tasks and can be integrated into websites, apps, and existing platforms. We customize powerful and smart conversational chatbots that enhance customer services with human-like interactions. Our AI powered bots empowers businesses with 24/7 support and rapid query resolution.
We create Gen AI solutions capable of producing unique content, art, and multimedia outcomes for your business industry and target audience. Redefine innovation with custom Gen AI development solutions built with transformative capabilities of open-source and proprietary large language models like GPT, Llama, Gemini, etc.
Build AI apps that drive user engagement, fulfill business objectives, and enhance UX and brand values. Our AI development team crafts responsive web and mobile apps with intuitive user interfaces and high-speed performance. You can count on our AI engineers to transform your vision into apps that improve operations and user experiences.
Add suitable AI technologies into your existing digital solutions. We can integrate artificial intelligence into your systems and workflows to empower your business with greater capabilities and trending features. Our expert AI developers ensure a seamless AI integration process that does not interrupt your current infrastructure.
Run your AI systems without friction with dedicated support solutions from AI development company India. We can help you with algorithm updates, troubleshooting errors, model training, data quality checks, and more. We can address issues with AI systems before they impact operations, facilitating smoother functionality and improved user experiences.
We can unlock exponential growth for your business with simplified AI solutions. Whether you need valuable guidance or end-to-end solutions, we are happy to help.
Talk to Experts/ How to Hire? /
Hiring Indian programmers can ensure the competitiveness of your business while saving money and time to build applications. This particular approach to outsource specialists has become widely popular among global companies.
We can help you extract key business insights from structured and unstructured data. We also choose the best ML models for resolving specific problems efficiently.
Launch impactful experiences with tailored NLP-based AI solutions. With rich experience in NLP, we can help you leverage real-time voice recognition and conversational AI.
Experience reliable real-time business solutions with deep learning algorithms that are ideal for in-depth data analysis and language translation.
We can help you build powerful AI systems that forecast future trends and customer behaviour with the help of statistical algorithms and machine learning techniques.
/ Our Expertise /
/ Industry Verticals /
Leverage AI in healthcare to improve patient care, streamline tasks, and get assistance in advanced medical research. We build HIPAA-compliant AI healthcare apps that aim to enhance life care.
Gain data-driven insights, performance measurement, predictions and forecasting, real-time calculations, automate tasks, and improve decision-making with advanced AI and machine learning algorithms.
Build state-of-the-art AI solutions that can streamline quality control, offer predictive maintenance, and help with supply chain optimization. So, you can maximize operational efficiency for higher outputs.
Enable AI for accurate, personalized product recommendations, inventory optimization, and more. Building AI apps for your online store can help you understand customer behavior and optimize the sales funnel.
Automate key business processes like order management, packaging & processing, and get real-time updates on traffic road conditions with smart AI apps for your logistic business.
Empower your business with AI chatbots that can answer questions, make reservations, and provide recommendations to your customers. We can build apps that resolve key problems like housekeeping schedules, optimized pricing strategies, etc.
We have worked across 30+ industry verticals and deliver comprehensive AI applications with regulatory compliances and best practices.
Connect With Us/ Our Process /
Each project is unique, and we adjust our process accordingly to tailor seamless AI applications that adapt to your key business processes. Below is a glimpse of the main steps involved in building AI projects.
We analyze and enlist the problems you want to resolve by using AI or ML. This could include anything that you want to automate or enhance with AI.
Collect relevant high-quality data that are focussed on your problems. We clean, preprocess, and format the data to ensure it is suitable for training the AI models.
We select a suitable machine learning algorithm or AI model that matches your problem. We train the model and fine-tune it to ensure excellent performance.
We divide the data into different sets for training and testing to validate the performance of the AI models and analyze it for accuracy with relevant metrics.
Once the AI model is ready, we deploy it as a web or mobile app or add it to your existing systems. We ensure that the model is functioning as per expectation before deployment.
Post launch, our AI team continuously monitors the performance of the applications and collects data on user feedback, tracking key metrics for enhancing the performance.
/ Our USPs /
We enhance your business performance with innovative, data-driven AI development solutions. As a artificial intelligence software development company in India, we emphasize the use of diverse and relevant data to ensure accurate outcomes that are free from bias and perform exceptionally well across scenarios. With a team of skilled AI engineers, we can help you explore new revenues for your business growth.
We deliver AI applications that streamline operations, enhance productivity, and drive business growth for the clients. Based on your key requirements, we create a project proposal with well-defined budget and timeline estimates. So, you can monitor the progress of the application and manage the project with the best tracking tools.
/ Pricing Models /
No two businesses are the same, as each has unique challenges, goals, and aspirations. Accounting for all of it, we offer you three distinctive models for collaboration.
Has a pre-agreed scope, budget, and timeline, with a fixed fee for the entire project. It's suitable for well-defined project scope.
Pay for the actual time spent on the project on an hourly basis, rather than a fixed price. Ideal for projects with evolving requirements.
Developers working for your company as an extension of your in-house team. You get more control over the team's work and can access their expertise directly.
/ FAQs /
AI projects can be simple or complex, and depending upon many factors, it can take several weeks to months to build and launch them completely. The precise time depends upon the following:
We are a responsible AI app development company and follow best practices to maximize data security and privacy for all projects. Some of the key strategies we implement for enhancing security in AI applications are:
Our consultants can provide you with an accurate, guilt-free estimate. AI development cost depends upon many factors, like
As a customer-focussed AI software development company, we adhere to agile principles and make it a point to regularly update the progress of the project to all the stakeholders. We also encourage you to use modern tracking tools like Basecamp, Zoho, etc. This will allow you to stay tuned with live-updates about the project.
AI development services can benefit your business in the following ways:
Enhance Operational Efficiency: Automate repetitive tasks, streamline workflows, and improve productivity through AI-powered solutions.
Data-Driven Decision Making: AI helps you with vast amounts of data analysis to identify patterns and trends, enabling better-informed business decisions.
Boost Customer Experiences: Personalize customer interactions, provide targeted recommendations and improve customer service with AI-powered features.
Cost Optimization: AI software development services can reduce costs by automating manual processes and optimizing resource allocation.
Gain Competitive Advantage: Stay ahead of the curve by adopting cutting-edge AI technologies and solutions. Access AI tools to launch ideas quickly.
Access Specialized Skills: Gain access to vetted experts without the need to find and hire a large in-house AI development team.
Yes, we begin with deep research to gain a complete understanding of your existing IT infrastructure. This allows us to plan and build compatible AI solutions that can be easily integrated and fine-tuned to adapt to your existing processes.
/ Testimonials /
/ Blogs /