For a country of 1.4 billion people entering an AI-driven era, is 9,000 responses a sign of participation or
- Published on July 9, 2024
- In Global Tech
‘India has a High Appetite for Generative AI,’ says AWS’s Chief Medical Officer
Dr Illing completed his undergraduate paediatric training at St John's Medical College and Hospital, Bengaluru, almost two decades ago.
Image by Nikhil Kumar
Generative AI holds significant promise for India, given its cultural and language diversity. At the AWS Summit, Washington DC, Rowland Illing, the director and chief medical officer for global healthcare and non-profits, AWS, acknowledged the same.
“The appetite for generative AI in India is high. The technology can help with language and culturally sensitive information, addressing the breadth of languages in India. It's exciting to see opportunities in the National Digital Health Mission as well,” he told AIM.
Illing’s sentiments resonate well since many Indian healthcare companies are actively tapping into the potential of generative AI. Today, every health company is turning into an AI company.
For example, Apollo partnered with Google Cloud to improve
📣 Want to advertise in AIM? Book here
Shritama Saha
Shritama (she/her) is a technology journalist at AIM who is passionate to explore generative AI with a special focus on big techs, database, healthcare, DE&I, hiring in tech and more.
Related Posts
Why Everyone’s Suddenly Talking About India’s New Data Protection Rules
‘My Manager Thinks Copilot is Saving 40% Time’
Companies used to judge developers by architecture. Now, they judge them by how many times they press ‘tab’.
What if Michael Burry is Actually Right?
“Hyperscalers are overstating profits by understating depreciation and inflating earnings by billions”
What IndiaAI Mission Can Learn from France
Anne Bouverot, who led the AI Action Summit in Paris last year, visited India last week.
The 9 Viral AI Posts of 2025
This year, every week brought a post that shifted how people talked, coded or argued about AI.
Indian Companies are Forcing Developers to Use Cursor
Indian developers critical online of AI-first workplaces where tools like Cursor and Copilot are no longer optional.
The Real Future of Work Blends Algorithms and Humanity, Say Leaders
“A forward-looking organisation looks at AI and technology more as a collaborator than a threat.”
Celonis Wants India to Be the Brain of Enterprise AI
Munich-based firm is betting on India’s growing clout in both AI talent and enterprise tech.